Introduction
Once 10 elderly men played basketball. After finishing one game and during the break, they all went to the restroom. Coming out of the restroom, one of them forgot that he was still in the middle of a game, so he went straight home.
With only nine people in the court, the remainder decided to wait. After waiting for some time, they decided to go look for the missing one. Unfortunately, no one remembered who was missing from among them and who they should look for!
We may think this is silly, but I am sure each one of us has a good story to tell about our forgetfulness, to varying degrees. You have probably opened the fridge door to get something from the fridge, but then you stared at the wide-open fridge not knowing what you meant to get.
Or you have stepped into one of the rooms in your house to get something, but then you came out of the room without getting anything. Or you may have paused in the middle of your sentence not remembering what you were going to say. You get the idea…
If you are elderly, then you can probably attribute these symptoms to dementia. At certain advanced age, our brain cells start shrinking and our memory cannot retain more recent information. Instead, we remember mostly things from the past.
Those who are relatively younger may suspect that they’ve got early onset Alzheimer’s. Their brain cells die too early and too fast to retain recent memories. Both dementia and Alzheimer’s are to date untreatable, since medications can only slow their deterioration.
There are, however, treatable causes of forgetfulness. If we google the word “forgetfulness,” we are told that being forgetful is due to a number of factors, and if we take care of those factors, we may address our forgetfulness.
There is a particular kind of forgetfulness which we intend to consider in this message, the consequences of which is devastating.
With other types of forgetfulness, the consequences range from non-consequential to serious. If you forget to put salt into your cooking, you can put some later. It is non-consequential.
If you forget to take your blood pressure medication, you may get a stroke. As a result, you may have to be on a wheelchair for the rest of your life, but you still live.
The type of forgetfulness that we are going to consider is detrimental because its ultimate consequence is to be forgotten by God for all eternity in hell.
To be thrown into hell is to be erased from God’s memory, or to have one’s name blotted out from the book of life. Yet, in my opinion, this type of forgetfulness is far more treatable than any other kinds of forgetfulness, because the cause is none other than distractions.
All sorts of distractions beckon us to pursue them. As a result, we pursue many unworthy things yet forget the one and only thing that matters, namely, the Lord our God.
Nevertheless, we should be thankful that even though we are forgetful, the Lord remembers. He not only remembers us, but he also uses various means to help us not to forget. What’s more, he even gives us a community of faith to help us remember.
God Remembers
When we say, “God remembers,” what is the first thought that comes to mind? I guess it comes in the form of a question, “Does this mean God may forget? Hopefully God forgets what I did that day!” No, God never forgets!
If God never forgets, then when the Bible says, “God remembers” it certainly doesn’t merely mean “God doesn’t forget.” It means much deeper and more significant than that.
It doesn’t involve the brain cells because God has none of those; God is spirit. This remembrance isn’t subject to the limitations of human bodily weakness, but is upheld by his glorious power and divine attributes.
By his attribute, God is all-knowing and ever present. Nothing is unknown to him, whether they are things of the past or the future, because he was there in the past and he will be there in the future. He is also present here, there, and everywhere at the same time.
Even though God has no physical body and brain cells, the Bible tells us that God has emotions. In fact, human emotions are reflections of God’s emotions, as we are created in His image.
God revealed himself to Moses in Exod 34:6, “The LORD, the LORD, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness.”
How then do we describe the way God remembers? Probably it is best described in Isa 49:15, “Can a woman forget her nursing child, that she should have no compassion on the son of her womb? Even these may forget, yet I will not forget you.”
God is comparing whether or not he will forget his people with whether or not a nursing mom will forget her nursing infant. The comparison begins with a rhetorical question, where we see the parallelism: for a other to forget her nursing child is to have no compassion on the son of her womb.
This rhetorical question expects a negative answer. Of course, a mother cannot forget her nursing child, and of course she cannot be without compassion on the son of her womb. But the purpose of the rhetorical question is to point to the comparison that comes next.
It is a comparison from good to better, or from high to higher. If a mother cannot forget her nursing child, then it is even harder for God to forget his people. Conversely, even if the mother can forget her nursing child, God will not forget his people.
We may also make use of the parallelism to say that, even if a mother may be without compassion on her nursing child, God will not be without compassion on his people.
We may now conclude that the way God remembers his people is by having compassion on his people. When he remembers us, he doesn’t merely think of us, but he pours his grace and mercy on us, and he makes all things work together for good.
If we ask, “Why would God remember?” To the Israelites, God remembers them because of his covenant with their fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Today, God remembers us because of his covenant with his Son.
God has given us to the Son, who obeyed the Father to the point of shedding his blood on the cross so that he might reconcile us with the Father.
God remembers us because we have now been adopted into his family, and his Presence goes with us through his Spirit, both now and in eternity. Therefore, it is said that those who are in heaven are those who are remembered by God, whose name are written in the book of life.
On the other hand, those who are in hell are those who are forgotten by God eternally. They are forgotten because they have forgotten their Creator and rejected him in the first place.
We Should not Forget
I mentioned in the introduction that forgetting God is the most treatable kind of forgetfulness that may plague us, because the cause of such forgetfulness can be traced to distractions that are bombarding us.
Of course, to be able to trace the source of these distractions and to be able to handle them are 2 different things, and I don’t mean to say that we could do both on our own without God’s help.
Why do I say that distractions cause forgetfulness? The most obvious example is when you see a baby crying because mommy is going out to run some errands without it. How do we usually handle this situation if we are babysitters?
We usually try to distract the baby, don’t we? We try to make the baby forget that mommy is gone by bringing in some toys to distract it. Before we know it, the baby is pacified and playing happily with the toys.
Obviously, the first step in addressing our forgetfulness is to identify the distractions in our life. Distractions have existed since the beginning of human existence.
When God created Adam and Eve and placed them in the Garden of Eden, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil was a major distraction to them. It was there in the center of the garden, but they were not supposed to eat of it, the only thing excluded.
You can imagine their daily life in the Garden. They walk by the tree daily, while shaking their heads as they recall God’s prohibition. Until the day the serpent tempted Eve and caused both of them to eat of the tree and forget God and his prohibition.
To be sure, distractions are not exactly the same as temptations. If we fall into temptations, we sin, because we have disobeyed God’s express command, whether in stealing or in lying.
If we are distracted, we do not necessarily sin, because we can immediately re-focus. Yet, if we go on being distracted, we may drift further and further, without ever coming back to focus and thus forget.
The most obvious way to handle distractions is to ignore them, isn’t it? These days it is hard to surf the internet without the distractions of ads. How do you handle them? You ignore them, or better still, block them, rather than click on them.
Distractions themselves are not necessarily bad, and there is no prohibition against them. There is time to ignore them and there is time to respond to them, such as the messages on your phone.
It all depends on whether or not you allow yourselves to be distracted. If you feel the urge to read every message every time it comes in, no matter what you are doing then, you are allowing it to distract you.
In C. S. Lewis’ Screwtape Letters, the Devil tells his minions that the most effective way to deal with Christians is to make them busy.
In busyness we are most distracted, because we are most easily tyrannized by urgent matters. Thus, when we are busy God has to take the back seat.
On the other hand, people who are depressed and do nothing also forget about God, because they are “busy” in their mind miring in negative thoughts.
If we should not forget God in our day-to-day activities, much less should we forget him in the days of trouble, because God may send those troubles to remind us.
In our Scripture reading today from Psalm 77, the psalmist is in a crisis, and he cries aloud to God. He even doubts God’s steadfast love, promises, grace, and compassion:
“Will the Lord spurn forever, and never again be favorable? Has his steadfast love forever ceased? Are his promises at an end for all time? Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has he in anger shut up his compassion?” (Psalm 77:7-9).
Then in the midst of trouble and doubts he remembers and reminds himself of who God is and what God has done for him:
Then I said, “I will appeal to this, to the years of the right hand of the Most High.” I will remember the deeds of the LORD; yes, I will remember your wonders of old. I will ponder all your work, and meditate on your mighty deeds. Your way, O God, is holy. What god is great like our God? You are the God who works wonders; you have made known your might among the peoples. You with your arm redeemed your people, the children of Jacob and Joseph. (Psalm 77:10-15).
Indeed, God brings (not just allows!) difficulties and hardships into our lives to remind us of him and his works so that we might be thankful. It is better to suffer under God than to cruise without God in pleasure, isn’t it?
But there is an interesting contrast in the Bible. In Exod 13:3, Moses asked the people to “Remember this day in which you came out from Egypt, out of the house of slavery, for by a strong hand the LORD brought you out from this place. No leavened bread shall be eaten.” Yet what did the people remember?
In Numb 11:5, they said, “We remember the fish we ate in Egypt that cost nothing, the cucumbers, the melons, the leeks, the onions, and the garlic.”
Instead of remembering how God saved them from the house of slavery, where they suffered from the oppressions of their slave masters, they were distracted by the food of their imagination in Egypt, which they likely didn’t enjoy as slaves.
So, what are our distractions today? What is keeping us from remembering who God is and what he has done for us? The moment we are aware of these distractions and re-focus our mind on God and our relationship with him, we begin to remember what he has done for us.
We trace his blessings in our life, beginning with the visible things we enjoy most presently (Health/Wealth/ Relationships?). Then we proceed from “what” we enjoy to “why” we enjoy them.
At Thanksgiving table talks, people usually stop at the “what.” (“I am thankful for my family/job/health.”) As Christians, we need to understand, and if appropriate share also, why we are thankful, or why we enjoy what we enjoy.
There are many who have what we have and then more, but they don’t enjoy them, because they don’t see the “why” underneath the “what.”
People may cite the “why” (reason) as their being hardworking or intelligent or socially connected, but they forget about the invisible hand of God, which we call “providence.” Probably we need to put another layer of “why” (“Why is your hard work fruitful?”).
Remembering the “why” together with the “what” helps us to re-focus on God and give thanks to him. We enjoy the “what” not because we work harder than others, or more intelligent than others, but because God loves us in Christ and keeps his covenant, just as God chose Israel not because they were more in number than others, but because of God’s covenant with their fathers (Deut 7:7).
With so many distractions around us, all of us can easily be forgetful, but the indwelling Spirit of God reminds us as we pray to God and read his Word.
At the bottom of what we should remember is God’s holiness and our sinfulness. Who are we to deserve such goodness of God, instead of his wrath? It is because he loves us in his Son, who wants us to remember his death every time we come to his table for the Communion.
Remembering in the Community
On the other hand, the difficulties (or the blessings in disguise!) that reminds us of God’s presence may not necessarily come into our lives, but to others in our community.
When someone in our community is in difficult situations, as members of the same body, we feel the pain and anguish, because we are a part of them in Christ.
We then remind one another of the love of God in Christ. This is the most basic thing we do as a community, which is the body of Christ.
When we see members of the body thrive under pressure, we see the grace of God working in their lives, so that they are not crushed under pressure.
When members of the body are visibly blessed, we join them in giving thanks to God. In all these we remind one another of the work of God in our midst and give him thanks.
There is yet another aspect of remembering in the community, and Paul reminds us in Eph 2:11-13, “Therefore remember that at one time you Gentiles in the flesh, called ‘the uncircumcision’ by what is called the circumcision, which is made in the flesh by hands— remember that you were at that time separated from Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the world. But now in Christ Jesus you once who were far off have been brought near by the blood of Christ.”
We are called to remember our unthinkable past of being far off and separated from Christ as a community, but now being “brought near by the blood of Christ” (v.13). What are the implications of this?
On the one hand, we, as a community, are meant to remember as a body that we have been brought near (united!) by the blood of Christ. Without the blood of Christ through his death, we are still distant from one another. Each of us should remember this and be thankful.
On the other hand, every one of us in this community has been cleansed by the blood of Christ from our sins. No one is exempted. Therefore, we should cheer one another in our walk of faith, as Paul models it in his epistles, “I do not cease to give thanks to God for you…” (1 Cor 1:4; Eph 1:16; 1 Thes 1:2; 2 Thes 1:3; 2:13).
What do we do when we give thanks to God for our brothers and sisters? We mention them in our prayers! We intercede for them over their struggles.
Do we make it a habit to mention others in our prayers, giving thanks to God for them? Or we only pray for our own needs in our prayers?
Conclusion: Gospel Moment
We can only give thanks to God if we remember who God is and what he has done for us in Christ Jesus. The more we remember, the more thankful we are.
Since we are sinners, we are prone to forget, whether in pleasures or in difficulties, thus the Lord Jesus helps us by his Spirit and through his Presence in the Communion.
Thanksgiving to God should not be an annual deal, but as often as possible, if not daily, in our prayer. We continue to be thankful for Christ’s ongoing work of intercession on our behalf before the Father.
